Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Caleb Everett, is
a senior associate in the College of Arts and Sciences
at the University of Miami and a professor in the
anthropology department with the secondary appointment in psychology. And
today we're talking about his latest book, a Myriad
of tongues. Our languages reveal differences in how we
think. So. Doctor Everett, welcome to the
show. It's a big pleasure to everyone. Well
, thanks for having me. It's great to be
here. So, as a linguist, uh and
since the book is basically about linguistic diversity and our
languages are so diverse in many different kinds of aspects
and we'll get into some of those aspects. But
I would like to start by asking you, do
you think that in linguistics, particularly nowadays, people
still tend to assume too much universality in language?
Yeah, I would say so. And that's one
of the cases made in the book and I'm not
the only one making that case to be clear these
days. Um There, there's been an assumption of
that. At least some features of languages are universal
. And I think increasingly that argument is, is
harder to support. Basically, as linguists have done
more research in different parts of the world um with
different populations that are not western, educated, industrialized
, rich democracies, these so called weird societies.
And as the focus of linguistic research has been less
European or indo-european, let's say, um I think
that the the evidence for universals in, in language
are, are really uh harder and harder. The
evidence is harder and harder to come by. There
are still some who think that there are some core
tenets of language that are universal. I'm not one
of those folks. Um There are some reasonable arguments
, I just think it's harder and harder to support
. And as I said, there are a number
of linguists that have been making this case now for
a while and this book helps to synthesize some of
the work of those scholars. But when it comes
to the differences, we find across languages, I
mean, of course, this is a very broad
question but where would you say those differences stem from
primarily? I mean, that's a good question.
So some of the things relate to say, just
the different usage of function of the functional usage of
certain linguistic forms in certain contexts, right? So
you can think of something like like my last book
was about numbers and number words and things like that
. And it's clear that there are pressures on cultures
in certain contexts to develop number words more than in
other contexts, right? It's not that one is
better or worse. It's just that there are pressures
in certain contexts to develop certain features of certain linguistic
features. Some of it is a lot more analogous
to what we might think of as genetic drift,
right? Where it's just there are differences that crop
up in populations. When you have thousands of populations
living around the world, there are going to be
certain differences in speech and in cultural norms that develop
that maybe have no like clear motivation, they just
are differences, right? And that, that's a
big part of you get these, you know,
probabilistic tendencies across languages and then you and these are
gonna just operate in different ways in different contexts.
So those, those are part of the reasons for
the differences. Another potential reason for some of the
differences are uh environmental differences, right? So some
of this might be really obvious, like if you're
, if you're a hunter gather group in Amazonia,
you might have a greater need to distinguish certain um
flora and fauna around you in more precise ways than
say I would, right. So, you know
, um for instance, some of the people that
I've worked with in, in the Amazon, um
the Kiana, they have a variety of different words
for, for monkey species. Um But there's no
like sort of super ordinate term of monkey because that's
less of a useful feet, like it's very important
for them to break things down into the individual.
Whereas for, for me, even though I know
there are lots of terms for these species in English
, I don't know them. Right. So I
call a lot of, I have like a few
different terms for monkey. Now, that's something that's
clearly impacted in one way or another by the environment
. So you get this collage of motivations for why
languages differ, those, those are a few of
them anyway. And another one of those reasons has
to do with uh people's specific social needs. Correct
? Yeah. So social units, so like the
kind of um kinship terms that they have, you
know, this, this, this reflects, you
know, critical differences in, in terms of how
the social units are constructed within societies. There's some
research suggesting that um you know, languages spoken by
larger populations have some differences, some tendencies in contrast
to languages spoken by very small populations. Um That's
something that's hotly debated amongst linguists and amongst other cognitive
scientists. But yeah, there do seem to be
, there is some evidence that um varying social pressures
across groups impact how languages evolve. So let's get
into a few concrete examples here in the book,
you talk about time, for example. So what
do we know about how people think about time and
what relationship does that have with uh language? Yeah
, that's a really good question. So when you
, when I I mean, I'll give you an
anecdote, like when I, when I teach um
a linguistics course here at the University of Miami,
and I ask students how you think about time and
they'll, they'll often start talking about past, present
and future as though these are sort of, you
know, immutable categories that exist. And obviously,
in some ways, we all experience time. You
know, the claim in the book is not that
the language you speak totally changes your perception of time
passing itself. But it comes as a surprise to
some students, to most students that many languages don't
have three tenses. You know, many languages have
only two tenses, some languages have no tenses,
some languages have as many as seven tenses. And
so this this reflects the fact that that how we
delineate time linguistically can vary sometimes more than people realize
, right, whether that has any effect on how
people think about time when it comes to tense less
clear. Um But there are some other examples of
the way that we talk about time that seem to
indicate that there are these associated differences in how people
think about time. So the common metaphor of the
the past being behind you and the future being in
front of you. That's not something that we have
in English and that exists in a number of languages
around the world. That's not a metaphor that exists
in all the world's languages, right? So in
many languages, some talked about in the book,
you talk about the past as though it is in
front of you. And the future is though it's
behind you. And researchers that have, have studied
these groups have shown, for instance that when they're
talking about the past, they oftentimes point in front
of themselves, right? Whereas in English, when
we talk about the past, we tend to point
backwards, right? So this seems to reflect these
gestures seem to reflect some wider cognitive processes that are
, that are sort of being indicated by the the
metaphors that we use. Or you could say that
the metaphors themselves are somehow impacting how we think about
the passing of time. One of the really fascinating
examples in the book is from a group of people
called the Eno in New Guinea. And this is
research done by other folks at the University of California
, San Diego and other places showing that in that
language, they tend to talk about the time is
flowing uphill, you know, so whether you point
in front of you or behind you depends on which
way you're facing on a hill at the time that
you're talking. And you can imagine that if you're
trying to learn that language, as you say,
an anthropological linguist, trying to figure that out,
it must be really tricky to figure that out,
right? But then you talk to someone who speaks
a language like that and it might seem very natural
to them. I think that's one of the interesting
things is that these ways of talking about time and
gesturing about time come to seem very natural as though
it's like just the default human experience. When in
reality it clearly isn't. There's some, there's more
variability there than, than people often realize. So
, since you've done work on numbers does the way
we talk about time connect in any way to the
way we talk about numbers. I I'm asking you
that also because I mean, at least in more
Western languages, I, I'm not sure about the
universality of this or not, but we tend also
to subdivide time in terms of hours, minutes,
seconds, I mean, count basically the passage of
time in that way. So uh is there some
connection there? Yeah, I think so. I
mean, I think it's, it's almost hard to
overstate what a difference that makes, right? So
if you talk about, um there was some research
done with an Amazonian group about 10 years ago.
The Tupi kawa is the name of the language anyway
. And this is not that far from where I've
done some of my research in the Amazon. And
there's not any evidence that they talk about time and
hardly at all right. There's really not much concrete
evidence of that and they don't seem to use the
metaphors for time, any of the metaphors that I
just mentioned, like future being in front of you
past being behind you. So you can imagine that
in a group like that when there aren't many words
that are associated with things related to time, of
course, that doesn't mean people aren't experiencing time in
that group. But the point is that they don't
have words for things like week or month or,
or, um, season perhaps. But in a
context like that, you can think about how foreign
, something like hours and minutes and seconds seconds are
, right. And these sort of linguistic units pretty
much govern our lives, right? Like everything about
our lives is constrained by hours and minutes and seconds
. And if you think about the origins of these
terms, they're very much related to the numerical systems
of other languages, some of which are now extinct
, right? So if you the base 60 system
, you know, 60 minutes, 60 seconds that
comes from really can be traced back to Ancient Mesopotamia
where there was a base 60 number system. And
then that influenced the tracking of time in different places
, including Ancient Greece and then made its way into
Europe, right? Um, in terms of 12
hours, that's something that goes back to Egyptian sun
dials thousands of years ago where they had 10 units
for the sun dial for dividing the day up and
then they added a unit for dawn and a unit
for dusk. You know, when the light,
when the sun's not completely up, but it's light
out and then, so that's how you get 12
, right? And then if you do that at
night too, eventually we had the people had the
idea to divide the night up into equal units also
. So you can see how you go when you
count hours and minutes, you're going from something that's
influenced by Ancient Egyptian sundials to ancient Mesopotamian number systems
to then the decimal number system that we all take
for granted. So you're kind of as you tell
time, you're kind of taking a trip through time
through these different eras. And so this is kind
of all this cultural residue that has been, you
know, acquired in our, in our uh tracking
of time. But we learn it, we take
it for granted and obviously, it affects how we
think in some level because we're constantly thinking about hours
and minutes and seconds and how much longer do we
have before the next meeting or whatever? It very
much governs our lives. So, so, yeah
, I think it's, it's fair to say that
there's some influence of thought uh based on our number
systems on how we think about time. Uh So
when it comes to numbers, uh if what I'm
about to say is outdated, please correct me.
But uh I read some time ago that at least
in more traditional societies like hunter gatherers, horticulturalists and
so on that when it comes to counting, people
usually count up to three, sometimes five and then
they just use words like our terms like, uh
, a few, many a lot. And so
it's just in societies where we have really formal schooling
that we count beyond, beyond three or five.
I mean, is that true? I mean,
yeah, that's, that's not an inaccurate generalization.
I mean, it's definitely a general, there are
exceptions. Right. There are plenty of, um
, hunter gatherer groups, especially one of the things
about number systems is they spread very quickly, right
? Like people tend to see how useful they are
or they have economic pressures to get to know numbers
so that they're not taken advantage of. And so
they can sort of spread like this cognitive fire.
But it is true that there are some very simple
number systems in hunter gatherer groups where there doesn't seem
to be a lot of usefulness maybe to number systems
in ways that there might be for us. And
obviously, it's not because these people are incapable of
learning numbers. It's just that they haven't developed in
their society. A famous case is, um the
PETA Ha in the Amazon. This is a group
I've spent some time with the work of my father
made this group famous. Um, but they have
basically no numbers at all, no precise numbers.
And some cognitive scientists um went from Berkeley and mit
went down there and sort of helped demonstrate this experimentally
. So that's one that's an extreme case. There
seemed to be maybe a couple of cases like that
worldwide where there's no precise number of words at all
in a group. What's more common is what you're
talking about a, a 12 mini system or a
123 mini system or some groups that do have elaborate
number systems, but maybe they're just not used as
frequently. So, um I worked with this one
group but this was over 10 years ago. Um
that had number words that it was thought that they
didn't have number words when I did some experiments with
them, it was clear that they do have number
words, but it wasn't clear how many people in
the culture knew them. Right. So, some
of the, some of the older men that I
talked to seem to know the number system that they
had used when, when hunting or talking about how
long they were going to be gone on a hunting
trip. But I think that's another factor is how
, how, how diffuse are the numbers within a
society for, for societies like ours because you're sort
of, they're inculcated in us from a really young
age, like you're just taught numbers. And again
, it's another thing that just comes to seem to
be like a default way of how the world works
. And we don't realize that these are actually sort
of culturally specific things that we're acquiring as, as
we're raised in a numerate culture. Mhm. So
, we've sort of already made reference to this.
But, uh, when we talked about, for
example, how certain people tend to think about,
uh, time, uh, uh, uh,
if we're talking about the past back then or in
front of them or something like that. So there's
already somewhat of a rela, uh, of a
relationship between time and space there. But looking across
languages, I mean, how much really is there
of a relationship between how we talk about time and
how we talk about space? I mean, that's
a really good question. Um Another thing that's been
debated, but it's pretty clear that cultures in general
make use of space to talk about time, right
? Time is this really abstract thing, we can't
reach out and touch it. It's not like around
us. And so mapping time onto space, which
is more concrete and we can talk about it as
being in front of us or it helps us make
sense of this very nebulous thing of the passing of
time, right? Even as I say that I'm
saying, the passing of time and obviously that's a
spatial thing too, like time is not really passing
. And so there have been some suggestions that every
culture, they may talk about time in terms of
space in different ways, like the examples I gave
before. But every culture talks about time in terms
of space somehow. But there again that there's been
suggestions that that is not a universal, it's just
a tendency because we seem to, for everything that
we say, oh, this is a universal of
how people talk. Inevitably someone will come back and
say now I've been working with this group for,
you know, 10 years and I swear they don't
do that. You know, it's like, it's
more of a sampling problem than anything. There,
there could be that certainly does seem to be a
very strong tendency though, across human populations. People
like to make sense of time in terms of space
. Another very interesting thing related to space is how
we use directions. Like for example, we in
our western languages tend to use left and right.
But there are other languages where people actually use cardinal
orientations like east and west. So do we know
exactly why there are those differences? I mean,
that's a good, that's another great question. I
think in terms of why the differences exist, it's
, it's always easy to debate, right? We
can come up with different ideas like, so what
you're talking about in terms of egocentric directions, right
, based on the body, like left versus right
, these very common worldwide. And it's another thing
that at some point people said, well, this
is just a universal humans think about space in terms
of centered around their body. And so they're always
going to describe things as being, they're going to
use some egocentric system. It may not be left
versus right, but it's going to be something like
that. And then inevitably, it turns out there
are plenty of groups that don't do that. So
some of them are more geocentric which, you know
, centered around features of the earth or this could
be something like, you know, like you said
, cardinal directions like east versus west, north versus
south. And then it turns out there are plenty
of groups where it might not exactly be those directions
, but the way that they give spatial reference,
the way that they talk about spatial references or give
directions tend to be geocentric. It's not left versus
right, it's not centered on the human body.
And so there the differences in spatial uh terminology and
how people refer to the space around themselves turns out
are much greater than people once thought back in the
say seventies and eighties. And basically, since the
nineties, there's been increasing research showing that people think
about space and really diverse ways now why those differences
exist? That's, you know, we can debate
how much of that is just like what I said
earlier, something analogous to genetic drift where it's just
like people are going to do things differently in different
contexts. They just, I think there are some
some ways of talking about space that are clearly more
likely to develop in certain areas. So like things
that are centered around the sun, right? Or
where are probably more like there's going to be some
bias towards like equatorial sunny regions, right? Where
east tends to be in a clear direction and west
tends to be in the clear direction. You can
imagine why that might be less likely to develop in
high latitudes or something like that where east and west
aren't so, so obvious. Um But you know
, these, these environmental effects seem to be subtle
and they're not deterministic, like we can't just say
, oh, this, this language is spoken here
and so the people probably talk about space this way
, right? Um There are a number of cultures
though where they talk about directions in terms of uphill
or downhill, you know, in a certain plane
. And it's not necessarily the immediate hill that they're
on, but it's the general trajectory of the geography
and the surrounding terrain. And obviously, you wouldn't
develop a system like that if you just live in
the plains of North America or something like that where
there aren't a lot of hills like that, that's
pretty clear that there's some environmental influence. How much
is a matter of, of debate. So we
earlier, we've already touched a little bit on how
languages also influence in a way how we understand and
talk about social relationships. And you mentioned kinship systems
, for example, but it also applies to things
like social groups and classes, race, ethnicity,
gender and so on. Yeah. Yeah, it
, it relates to everything. And so some of
the terms, I mean, gender is a good
one, right? Where there are some languages that
have maybe a, a term for a generic third
gender and a lot of languages. It's just binary
. Um in terms of kinship, there, I
go into a few of these things in the books
, but there are entire volumes dedicated to differences in
kinship terms because they can be very extreme, right
? So whether or not um like one feature that
I think is interesting because I've come across it in
some of my own work is age differences in kinship
, right? So in the example of the Carico
, where you have differences between that brother and sister
, there's no term, just brother or sister,
the the term sister, like there's a term for
older sister, there's a term for younger sister,
but you're always kind of referencing your age and relationship
to the people around you in your kinship network.
And that kind of, you know, reciprocity of
reference to age is something that we're not that familiar
with. It can feel a little bit strange,
but, you know, after you spend enough time
talking to people like that, that these are clearly
very important aspects of their, of their kinship system
. And so I think that's kind of the interesting
thing is that people have different kinship systems, they
have very different terms for the different, you know
, nodes within that kinship system. And then this
kind of reinforces certain way of thinking about relationships.
Mhm. Uh In the book, you also get
a little bit into how we talk about colors and
smells and uh how that influences how we remember visual
and olfactory stimuli. So, could you tell us
a bit about that? Yeah. So this is
research that goes back decades now. Um It's,
it's been evolving over the last few decades, let's
say. So. Um there, there have been
these surveys done starting with color terms. Um uh
Berlin and k these two scholars, they did this
, they did this influential book um over, I
guess it's been about 50 years now and they demonstrating
the differences in color terms across a lot of the
world's languages. And the basic way that this works
is um researchers in different places give uh paint chips
, color chips to different groups and have them name
them, you know, a whole array of different
hues and see where do they break up color terms
? Are there differences across languages in terms of how
the hues are broken up? And it turns out
there are actually a lot of differences and there are
a lot of differences in terms of the number of
terms that, that uh languages have so called basic
color words. There are some suggestions that some languages
don't really have basic color words. But setting that
aside, most languages have somewhere between three and 11
, basic color terms. So there's a lot of
variation, but then there still are some tendencies,
which is really maybe not too surprising because we all
have the same visual apparatus, we're all seeing the
world in, in roughly the same way. However
, there is some evidence that the some of the
languages color term distinctions impact in subtle ways how people
think about colors, or at least how they group
them in certain cognitive tasks and their, their capacity
to recall certain color terms. So if you,
if your language makes, it makes a color term
distinction between blue and green, for instance, which
many languages do not. Um There's evidence that when
you perceive um colors stimuli that that are on different
sides of that border blue versus green, you're more
likely to recall that difference in some experimental tasks,
right? So no one makes the claim that like
these are huge differences, right? A lot of
these things can get distorted, these are probably fairly
minor differences. Um but it's still interesting, right
? Because it suggests that the language that you speak
impacts in subtle ways how you perform on certain visual
tasks, right? Uh But uh I mean,
that's about basically recalling certain callers and smells, for
example, but do, do we know if language
actually influences what people see and smell? Is that
something that happens or not? I mean, there
is some research on this, I I don't how
they see and how they smell is maybe too strongly
worded, but I do think some of the results
are surprising, right? So that there's some evidence
that like being presented with um verbal stimuli impacts the
likelihood that you're going to discriminate certain colors in a
visual task, right? Um So, and you
know, and then obviously, if your language doesn't
have those words as verbal stimuli, maybe that affects
how you do in certain visual tasks. But I
, and, and there, by the way,
there is a bunch of research now coming out suggesting
that words for smells vary more radically across cultures than
we once thought. And that some cultures have abstract
odor terms that are more analogous to our abstract color
terms. You know, for instance, in English
instance in English, we don't really have abstract odor
terms to the extent that some of these other languages
now seem we we're seeing that they do have whether
that actually impacts how you smell, you know,
that's a different question, but there's some evidence.
But I would say that it's that the, you
know, it's not like huge. I I never
want to give like when I'm talking about this stuff
in class, I never want to give students the
impression that like it just changes how you see completely
. I think that kind of view was romanticized way
too much and it as a result, it made
some um scholars more skeptical of any differences, right
, that there's any differences in thought based on language
and the the claims these days are more subtle than
that. Yeah, but yes, there, there
do seem to be some effects. It's just the
size of those effects is, is debatable. Yeah
, I, I ask you, I asked you
that because actually, I mean, perhaps a while
ago there was a period of time where certain people
were claiming or almost claiming. Actually that perhaps the
way we talk, the words we used to refer
to colors, actually, it changed our visual system
when it came to how we process colors and we
would be able to identify some and completely miss others
or something like that. But perhaps that's too strong
, it might be too strong. But I,
I don't wanna, I don't wanna be dismissive of
all that work either because I do think there's some
really careful experimental work showing. So I'll give you
an example of a study. I don't know if
I talk about this in this book, but like
, you know, research showing that people are better
at discriminating certain colors presented to the right visual field
, which is processed by the left hemisphere where most
of our language processing typically happens. And they show
that the color discrimination differs for the right visual field
depending on the color terms that you have in your
language, right? So that is an example of
sort of an effect on how people are actually immediately
discriminating colors, right? So that's so I,
I don't want to give the impression that there's no
evidence for any of this stuff. It's just sometimes
people get the sense that like, oh you just
in the popular media, maybe the the uptake of
some of that work sometimes is just oversimplified to the
point that it seems like if you don't speak a
language with green and blue distinctions, you're really just
not gonna, everything's just gonna be collapsed visually and
that's not what the research suggests, but there do
seem to be some effects. So earlier, we've
also mentioned briefly how the physical environment can influence our
particular languages evolve. And in the book, you
go through the example of extreme ambient aridity. So
ho how does that particular kind of environment influence our
languages or particular languages have evolved? Um Yeah,
that's a, that's probably of the research I've done
. That's the most hotly contested research, right?
Because um whenever you suggest environmental influences on language,
it turns out there's there's some things that make people
uncomfortable about that, I think. Um but I
would argue that that's actually almost a boring thing,
right? Like where there's plenty of research in the
lab showing that really dry air affects how the vocal
cords operate, right? That's not controversial. That's
in fact well established and you kind of know this
from personal experience, right? Like even if you
spend a couple of days in the desert, not
drinking too much, um you can sort of see
effects on your vocal cords. Now, the question
is, does that kind of thing impact how languages
evolve? And so I had this paper with um
uh two colleagues of mine, uh Damian Blasi and
Sean Roberts. This was quite a while now ago
now um in the proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, and we suggested that in really dry places
, um complex tones which require precision of the vocal
cords might be less likely to evolve. This was
one of those things that got caught by the media
and I would say really oversimplified by the media.
And so it, it created, that was part
of what created some of the headaches, right?
Was that people they the uptake seemed to be that
we were suggesting that wherever the language is spoken,
you could predict whether it's tonal or not. And
we weren't even suggesting a broad association between humidity and
, and complex tones. We were just saying,
hey, in really dry places, maybe it's less
likely that they would evolve, given this research in
the lab on how the vocal cords work. And
then we showed a lot of data cross linguistically across
the thousands of languages that seem consistent with that,
but it's ultimately correlational. So you can debate it
whether or not that's actually, and it's been hotly
debated since then. Basically, there was, I
should say a really cool study um by some Chinese
scholars this year after my book was already off to
press that offered, I think even better evidence for
this than we did. Because one of the things
they these Chinese scholars did was they looked at a
million actual audio files um by people that these audio
files were recorded all over China. And what they
found was that in really dry places, you can
see even in natural speech outside the lab that there's
an effect of dry air on the precision with which
the vocal cords vibrate. So that doesn't mean that
we were definitely on the right track, but it's
suggestive that, you know, at least in that
case, there does seem to be ambient influence on
how the vocal cords operate which again, and I
don't find that uh particularly shocking or surprising, but
it uh I have to be honest and say it's
still very hotly debated, you know, when it
comes to en environment to the influence of the environment
. One thing that I got across a few years
ago that really fascinated me was uh the existence of
whistled languages, like for example, in Greece,
in mountainous places, there are uh a few communities
where people in instead of really actually talking, they
whistle to one another because I mean, they are
very far apart because of the mountainous terrain and all
of that. And so it's easier for them to
convey information by whistling than by just talking to each
other. And uh there are actual whistled languages or
whistled versions of languages. Yeah, there are.
And you, you're, you're absolutely right that they
tend to be. There are some in some dense
jungle regions in, in Amazonia even. But there
is this tendency for them to be in mountainous terrain
in Turkey, in Greece, in, um,
Canary Islands in Central America. And so one plausible
interpretation is the one that you just gave, right
, you can see people at great distances in these
places, but you can't really communicate in the absence
of these whistled frequencies that allow you to communicate.
Right. That's a clear and I think that's less
controversial. However, it also gets at what's tricky
about some of these hypotheses, which is that at
the end of the day, it's a very small
number of data points. So it's hard to say
, to establish definitively that that's why, you know
, because there are always exceptions, languages that are
spoken in the dense Amazon or something like that and
aren't in the same places. But yeah, I
think it's totally reasonable interpretation. So another thing that
, that I would like to ask you about here
is do you think that there might be some issues
when we try to study grammatical patterns in sort of
idealized and written sentences? Because it might not really
be representative of the ways people normally use uh language
? No, I think that's, that's 100% accurate
and that, that's something that, you know,
those of us who have done field research. I
mean, these days, a lot of my research
is at a computer with databases or whatever or even
in a lab. But the field research in some
ways is the hardest work I've ever done because you're
in this place where you're, you're trying to learn
another language. But what you have to go on
a lot of times are idealized, sort of simple
clauses that you're trying to learn and you can,
without intention, you know, unintentionally, sometimes you
can project a certain kind of structure on the language
that you're learning, right? Because you're, even
if you're a well trained linguist, you bring in
all these biases of the things you want to learn
of the kinds of structures you expect to find.
And so you're asking them, how do you say
this, how do you say that? And we're
aware of these things? And people will say,
well, that's not how you really should do it
, but it's really hard to do it any other
way because life is too short, you know,
like what's the best way? Well, maybe the
best way is to go spend 20 years with an
indigenous group without bringing your biases and just try to
absorb the language around you and sort of pay attention
to what's more frequent and what's less frequent. That's
pretty much impossible for an academic career, right?
So what you find and this is alluded to in
the book is a lot of the very best research
in my opinion on indigenous languages comes from missionaries and
that's not something we're always comfortable talking about in academia
, but the truth is, some of them don't
do very good work. Some of them are the
only people who have actually spent decades living with the
group and sort of learning the language to the point
that they can say, you know, during my
first two years, I thought this was how the
language works. And then I found out 10 years
later that's not at all how it works. Right
. But that takes a lot of time. I
think that you're totally right though, in terms of
some of the issues, we bring methodologically what would
be useful in some ways is what we need is
what we are using now in languages like English that
inform a chat GP T huge large language models that
are based on just millions of clauses of data.
We just don't, we're not in a position to
get that level of data from indigenous languages. But
maybe we will be someday, you know, we'll
be able to just record data in massive amounts and
be able to figure out patterns in the data through
um in part through A I and other tools.
Yeah, maybe someday just uh doing some audio recording
of people just naturally talking and then uh through A
I translating that into text and then analyzing it or
something like that. Yeah, it's tough when there's
not any, you know, A I is not
going on anything, there's nothing already available on that
language. But yes, you can see how things
might improve in that way. Um to be fair
. A lot of field linguists these days, they
do record a lot of data, but then still
they have to go through that data very time consuming
. And so, you know, creating digital corpora
of data that they can just analyze maybe more objectively
. That's, that's still very, very time consuming
. So another very interesting question in linguistics is,
are, are words arbitrary? That is uh uh
I mean, are there any patterns in terms of
certain meanings tended to be to go associated with certain
specific sounds or even words? I mean, is
that something that occurs or are just words basically arbitrary
and any word can mean basically anything? Yeah,
I mean, I think most words probably are arbitrary
and can mean anything. And that's been the standard
line in linguistics research for a while. But increasingly
, I would say, especially over the last 10
years, there's been AAA growing number of studies showing
that more words, words are less arbitrary than we
thought, right? Or at least some words are
less arbitrary than we thought. So there are these
systematic correspondences between sounds and meanings across the world's culture
. So, one of the best studies I know
about this was done by that same colleague I mentioned
earlier, Damian Blasi, where they, he and
the team looked at thousands of languages and they found
some clear associations between certain sounds and certain meanings even
after controlling for a bunch of particular uh influences.
Um So like one example that I'm, if I
recall correctly is um, the word for nose tends
to have a nasal sound in it. So something
like nah, and you can sort of see why
that might be the case, right? When you
have produce a nasal sound frequencies resonate in the nasal
cavity. And so maybe that makes it more perceptually
salient. What was really interesting about that study is
that there are obviously thousands of exceptions, right?
It's, it's these very subtle tendencies that we,
there's no way we could have noticed, you know
, say 20 years ago. But as these databases
have come online and as they're being refined, we're
starting to be able to ask these questions in new
ways and test them in new ways. Things like
uh is a sound system impacted by the environment,
maybe not. But we could never really even ask
and test that question before. Are, are this
, are languages, are the words of languages maybe
more um systematic in terms of how they map sounds
and meanings than we once thought. Well, maybe
, but we could never have tested this, you
know, say 20 years ago. So it's requiring
new methods, new databases to, to maybe change
our perspectives on some of these topics and language research
. And do we have any idea if there are
sort of basic words that occur in uh virtually all
languages, you just to be clear, do you
mean semantics like in terms of content, like the
word meaning like the word? Yeah, I mean
there there have been some suggestions of this, right
? But it's um so number words have been one
of those suggestions, right? That was one of
the ones that at some point people said, OK
, language is made different in terms of how many
number words they have but every language has some precise
word for one and two turns out that doesn't seem
to be the case. Although the vast majority do
same with color terms that used to be thought to
be universal, you know, not so clear anymore
. Same with something like the word for mother.
You know, I increasingly there was this influential article
by two linguists uh Nick Evans and Steven Levinson.
This was over 10 years ago now, were entitled
The Myth of Language Universals. And, and they
went through some of these examples showing a lot of
these words that we thought were at least universal.
Even these. There, there always seems to be
an exception somewhere, but there's very strong tendencies,
right? So like it's, it's pretty much guaranteed
that a language is gonna have, you know,
pick a language at random that it's gonna have a
word for the concept one for instance. Uh And
so I've asked you about uh some of the issues
with having to actually have idealized and written form of
a particular language to study it uh is it really
possible to accurately translate every word and expression? Yeah
, I would say um I would say not,
right. And again, this is going to depend
on how closely related the languages are, how closely
related the cultures are. But I think that we've
, even if you speak two European languages as you
do, at least that many, right? Or
like I grew up in Brazil, I speak is
a lot better than I speak any Amazonian language.
Even between Portuguese and English. I find sometimes that
, that there's a little bit of loss in the
translation, right? There's, there's some cultural nuance
that's maybe missed as someone translates something into this language
. You know that I like the example of the
movie Lost in translation. You know that the movie
entitled Lost in translation with Bill Murray that was titled
very differently in a lot of different cultures because the
expression lost in translation itself can get lost in translation
, right? It's really hard to have it.
Now. That's not to say that nothing is perfectly
translatable. It's just that a lot of times we're
trans translating things that are maybe almost perfectly translatable,
but something is getting missed. There's some cultural nuance
that's not being conveyed by a phrase in one language
uh as it's translated into another. Now that that's
very interesting also because even when it comes to Portuguese
itself, because we have different versions of Portuguese,
like Brazilian, Portuguese and European Portuguese sometimes since you
mentioned lost in translation, the movie, it came
to my mind that sometimes for the same movie,
there are two different titles in Brazil and in Portugal
. And one of them is better suited for a
Brazilian audience because it combines the meaning better. And
the other one is better suited for a Portuguese audience
even though it's almost the same language. Yeah,
that's a good point because then you're talking about what
, well, essentially dialects of the same language.
Um Although anecdotally, I almost find Spanish easier to
understand than when I'm in Portugal to, you know
, because of the you guys uh from my perspective
as someone who grew up in Brazil, you're dropping
vowels all over the place, you know, but
it's, but I, I love the sound of
Brazilian Portuguese. But yeah, it's clearly, even
though it's technically, you know, I mean,
I love the sound of European, Portuguese even though
there's clearly different dialects, European. And so if
that can happen, even within two dialects is my
point, then imagine what can happen when you get
to very unrelated languages. Take something like um Kiana
, the language that I mentioned and then pick some
, you know, language in Australia or Eastern China
or wherever you want to pick, there's going to
be all kinds of things that, that are lost
related to the environments of these different places related to
the cultural context. That doesn't mean you can't translate
it all of course, people do it. But
it means that there, the idea of perfect translation
may be a myth at least when you're going between
certain languages. So I have perhaps two more questions
here. One of them, since your book is
basically about linguistic diversity and how uh for example,
social relationships or our society is structured and the environment
that we are exposed to influence our particular languages evolve
. And also how by using particular words, terms
and languages, it also influences how we perceive the
world in at least to a certain extent. What
are your thoughts on the word hypothesis? Yeah.
So Super War warf hypothesis is interesting in part because
Super and Wharf never actually co-authored anything. It's not
like they sat down that term always makes it seem
like they sat down and wrote some hypothesis out,
you know, and like really work. But it
was really um war's work um amongst the Hopi tribe
in the in the United States that, that gave
this a lot of impetus and the idea is related
to things like how they talk about time and some
of his suggestions haven't really, you know, stood
the test of time. But I think that the
general point that that is sometimes referred to by superior
war hypothesis may be accurate in the sense that languages
do impact cognitive processes, like linguistic diversity does impact
cognitive processes, but these impacts can be pretty subtle
. Um So I think the way that it's commonly
construed as is maybe off, right, like Super
Wharf is sometimes taken as, oh, like you
speak a different language, you know, say you
speak KPI, you really just don't get the passing
of time or anything. Like it's just a totally
different, you're living a more centered existence or something
like that. And that was never what Super or
Wharf meant in the first place. Um So it's
, it's kind of that the, the issue with
that the the label Super Wharf is that it's come
to mean all these different things that I don't think
even Wharf meant it to mean, right? Um
The, the the example that I start the book
off with kind of tongue in cheek is the words
for Snow example, right? Where that's something that
like is associated with the Super Wharf hypothesis. But
these, it, it it actually goes back to
the work of some other linguists. Even Franz Boas
was the first one who really pointed out like these
different words for Snow and different indigenous groups that they
maybe had more. But he never said anything about
there being hundreds of words for Snow and Eskimo or
you know, like, and you can see the
cycle of exaggeration that that this claim is tied to
like and some of it's in the media. So
I think even at one point, the New York
Times had some quote about there are hundreds of words
for Snow and in Eskimo, which is just not
true, it's just patently untrue. And so part
of the issue with the Super War warf hypothesis is
that it has about a century's worth of baggage.
Now that's been carried through the media in different places
and it's distorted, was maybe inaccurate in some places
. But at the end of the day, a
fairly reasonable points made by, by Wharf and then
kind of distorted them. And it took research in
the nineties and in the last 30 years to address
this topic um in more subtle ways and actually get
at this idea of do different do linguistic disparities actually
impact human cognitive processes and, and, and the
answer is yes, although sometimes the answer is a
subtle one and sometimes the answer seems to be no
, you know, we expect to find some difference
but you do some experimental tests and there don't really
seem to be any differences across populations in terms of
how they, they think about a given thing.
So that less exciting than like, oh, it
determines how you think or no, it doesn't determine
how you think, you know, the answers are
often in the gray areas. I think. So
, one last question then, um since we've been
talking about the diversity of language, I would also
like to ask you if you have any idea if
this is sort of representative or illustrative or one small
example of a broader discussion that is sort of ongoing
in psychology and cognitive science, I guess about the
universality of our psychology more broadly in terms of,
if we really across all societies share the same uh
information processing mechanisms or mechanisms or not, I mean
, do, do you think that this perhaps might
play a role in that sort of discussion or a
and if so do you think that perhaps we uh
we might also be assuming at least in certain instances
too much universality when it comes to human cognition or
not? I think so, it depends on who
you talk to, right? So some people now
assume less universality. I have really close colleagues who
are evolutionary psychologists and I actually find a lot of
that work pretty stimulating. I don't agree with all
of it, but they're sort of interested in what
are the, what are the processes, the evolutionary
processes that may maybe gave humans certain biases to think
about things in certain ways that would have presented selective
advantages. That's a totally reasonable thing to think about
. Um On the other hand, you know,
we only left Africa in waves as a species like
100,000 years ago. That's not a lot of time
, right? In terms of so those kinds of
pressures are probably applied to all cultures, right?
Like I, I would guess I would guess that
there's not a lot that's hardwired about us that's different
. Um But that doesn't mean that it's universally,
that universality is the answer, right? Because the
main thing, it seems to me reading into some
of these fields is that the the overarching theme is
that uh cortical plasticity, right? We're just this
like incredibly adaptive species and we do seem to do
things that are kind of unique, like pay attention
to the intentions of other members of our species and
we're clearly more social. Um But so the answer
is just like sort of this clear plasticity, which
allows for a lot of variability across groups in terms
of how we problem solve. And in terms of
how we, how we see the world in some
ways. But that I guess my point is that
I don't think that that's necessarily hardwired in us.
I think what's hardwired is this sort of a general
flexibility of cognition um which allows us to confront all
sorts of challenges in unique ways and then maybe those
are affected by culture and language over time so that
you get very different ways of addressing certain problems in
the world around us based on the cultural and linguistic
lineage that you're familiar with. Yes, because even
though perhaps there's no been enough time since we left
Africa for us to be to have acquired, let's
say new cognitive adaptations through genetic evolution, we also
have cultural evolution, for example. Right. Yes
, exactly. And that's ultimately a lot of this
book is indirectly about cultural evolution, right? Like
things people adapt to different places and sometimes it's actually
clearly an adaptive process. Sometimes it's just a matter
of, like I said, it's more an analogous
to genetic drift where there's lots of different cultures,
people doing different things, some things are going to
succeed in some environments, some things are just going
to be different just because they're different. But we
can clearly change a lot over a short amount of
time. Right. And so I don't want to
trivialize that point. So like if you take something
like literacy, writing has only been around about 5000
years, that's like nothing in terms of our trajectory
as a species. And until the last couple 100
years and really the last 100 years, the vast
majority of people even in the West were, were
not literate, right? And so, and there's
plenty of research showing that learning how to read and
write and learning math at an early age has certain
neural cognitive effects um that that you can detect in
lots of different ways. And so these are profound
, these can be profound effects that sort of differences
cross culturally. So even if we start off with
a general sort of plasticity that we all share,
that doesn't mean that the effects are trivial, right
? Cross culturally great. So the book is again
, a myriad of tongues, our languages reveal differences
in how we think I'm leaving a link to it
in the description box of the interview. And Dr
Everett just before we go apart from the book,
we would like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet. Oh, yeah,
working. So my previous book is um Numbers in
the making of us. So if you just Google
that you can find that also and it addresses similar
concept of human diversity, but with respect to number
systems and how they evolved, I have another book
but it's more sort of academic in nature. So
maybe less interesting of a read. Um But yeah
, Google, my name and the research and,
and, and you, and you'll find it.
But um yeah, I'm excited about this book and
it was great to talk to you about it.
Ricardo, I appreciate your great questions. No,
thank you so much for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been great to talk to
you. Ok. Awesome. Hi guys. Thank
you for watching this interview. Until the end.
If you liked it, please share it. Leave
a like and hit the subscription button. The show
is brought to you by N Lights Learning and development
. Then differently check the website at N lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal
. I would also like to give a huge thank
you to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Perego
Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O
of Alex Adam Kel Matthew Whitten. Be no wt
ho Ealj con Phil for Con. Then the Met
Robert Wine in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield
, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus
and H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S David
Sloan Wilson Yasi de Ro Ro Diego and the new
Jan Punter, Roman Charlotte Bli Nico Barba Adam Hunt
Pavlo Stass Nele Bach me, Gary G Almansa Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Bela Gil Cortes Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio
, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray
, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey
. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon
, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B brand Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman
, Perros, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson
, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Toni, Tom Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon,
Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si
, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.